# Chapter 4: Church Numerals: Decrement

## Predecessor

The implementation of the predecessor function is much harder than previous ones. In fact, Church thought for a long time that it might not be possible, until his student Kleene found it. In fact, there is a legend that Kleene conceived the idea while visiting his dentist, which is why the trick is called the _wisdom tooth trick_.


### Wisdom Tooth Trick

Let's define a helper function $\Phi$:

$$
\Phi=\lambda p.\pi(S(\pi_1p))(\pi_1p)
$$

Initially, we have:
$$
\Phi(\pi0\space0)=(\pi1\space0)
$$
By means of mathematical induction, we get:
$$
\Phi^n(\pi0\space0)=(\pi n\space (n-1))
$$

With the help of ordered pair, predecessor function could be defined as:

$$
\text{pred}=\lambda n.\pi_2(n\Phi(\pi0\space 0))\\
\text{pred }n=n-1
$$

Note that $\text{pred }0=0$. It is a limit of church numerals. Is it possible to define negative numbers or even rational numbers? Of course! Remember what I mentioned in _Data Abstraction_ part? Build one if it doesn't exist yet!


## Subtraction


Subtraction compared to predecessor is similar to addition compared to successuor.

$$
\text{sub}=\lambda mn.n\text{ pred }m\\
\text{sub }mn=m-n
$$

It reads as if "evaluating $n^\text{th}$ predecessor of $m$".

Proof is similar to the addition operation.

Note: if $m<n$, $\text{sub }mn=0$ according to the definition of predecessor function.

## Zero Predicate

Let's review the definitions of false and zero:

$$
F=\lambda xy.y\\
0=\lambda s.\lambda z.z
$$

With $\alpha$ reduction, it is clear that:

$$
F=0=\lambda x.I
$$

where $I=\lambda x.x$, called identity function, which returns its parameter unchanged.

Then, $0$ predicate could be defined as:

$$
\text{is-zero}=\lambda n.nF\text{ not }F\\
$$

Proof:

For $n=0$:

$$
\begin{array}{}
\text{is-zero }0&=&\text{is-zero }F\\
&=&(\lambda n.nF\text{ not }F)F\\
&=&FF\text{ not }F\\
&=&\text{not }F\\
&=&T
\end{array}\\
$$

For $n>0$:
$$
\begin{array}{}
\text{is-zero }n&=&(\lambda n.nF\text{ not }F)n\\
&=&nF\text{ not }F\\
&=&F^n(\text{not})F\\
&=&(\lambda x.I)^n(\text{not})F\\
&=&(\lambda x.I)^{n-1}(I)F\\
&=&\cdots\\
&=&IF\\
&=&F
\end{array}
$$

## Comparison

Subtraction is a fundamental approach to compare two numbers. With the help of the fact that if $m\leq n$, $\text{sub }mn=0$, less-equal function could be defined as:

$$
\le:\text{le}=\lambda mn.\text{is-zero}(\text{sub }mn)
$$

Since:

$$
x\le y\land y \le x \rightarrow x=y 
$$

Equality function could be defined as:

$$
=:\text{eq}=\lambda mn.(\text{and}(\text{le }mn)(\text{le }nm))
$$

Rest part of work should be easy now.


$$
\begin{array}{}
\ge:&\text{ge}&=&\lambda mn.\text{le }nm\\
>:&\text{gt}&=&\lambda mn.\text{not}(\text{le }mn)\\
<:&\text{lt}&=&\lambda mn.\text{gt }nm\\
\ne:&\text{ne}&=&\lambda mn.\text{not}(\text{eq }mn)
\end{array}
$$