# Chapter 5: Fixed Points and Recursion

## Fixed Points

In regular mathematics, a fixed point $x_0$ of a function $f$ is a point that maps back to itself, i.e.

$$
f(x_0)=x_0
$$

In regular mathematics, not all functions have a fixed point. But in lambda calculus, everything is a function and has a fixed point. 

## Fixed-point Combinators

How to solve fixed points of a function? It may surprise you that there is a kind of functions called fixed-point combinators capable to generate fixed points from arbitrary function by applying it with the function. I will introduce two of them.
$$
\begin{array}{}
\text{Curry's Paradoxical Combinator:}&Y&=&\lambda f.(\lambda x.f(xx))(\lambda x.f(xx))\\
\text{Turing Combinator:}&\Theta&=&(\lambda xy.y(xxy))(\lambda xy.y(xxy))
\end{array}
$$

For arbitrary function $F$, it has two fixed points $(YF)$ and $(\Theta F)$, i. e. $F(YF)=YF$ and $F(\Theta F)=\Theta F$.

Proof:

$$
\begin{array}{}
YF&=&(\lambda f.(\lambda x.f(xx))(\lambda x.f(xx)))F\\
&=&(\lambda x.F(xx))(\lambda x.F(xx))\\
&=&F((\lambda x.F(xx))(\lambda x.F(xx)))\\
&=&F(YF)
\end{array}\\
\begin{array}{}
\Theta F&=&(\lambda xy.y(xxy))(\lambda xy.y(xxy))F\\
&=&F((\lambda xy.y(xxy))(\lambda xy.y(xxy))F)\\
&=&F(\Theta F)
\end{array}
$$


## Infinity

What if I apply fixed-point combinator with succussor function $S$?

$$
YS=S(YS)=S(S(YS))=\cdots=S(S(S(\cdots)))=\infty
$$

Let's call it infinity. And it still meet requirement of a fixed point, since

$$
S(\infty)=\infty
$$

is reasonable and acceptable.

## Recursion

To implement certain algorithms, recursion is often needed. Let's take $\text{factorial}$ for example: 

$$
\text{factorial}=\lambda n.(\text{is-zero }n)1(\text{mul }n(\text{factorial}(\text{pred }n)))
$$

Since functions are anonymous, the name of the function is not assigned until the full definition of the function, So $\text{factorial}$ is actually used before its full definition, which is a hideous logical defect! Don't panic, let's take advantages of fixed points!


Take an inverse $\beta$ reduction on the right:

$$
\text{factorial}=(\lambda f.\lambda n.(\text{is-zero }n)1(\text{mul }n(f(\text{pred }n))))\text{factorial}
$$


Observe this carefully. It states that $\text{factorial}$ is a fixed point of 

$$
(\lambda f.\lambda n.(\text{is-zero }n)1(\text{mul }n(f(\text{pred }n))))
$$

Which means, the definition of $\text{factorial}$ could be rewritten as:

$$
\text{factorial}=\Theta(\lambda f.\lambda n.(\text{is-zero }n)1(\text{mul }n(f(\text{pred }n))))
$$

Perhaps you did never associate fixed points and recursion together before this fantastic journey. Mathematical consequence may be far beyond our imagination.


## Division, Remainder and Logarithm

With the help of recursion, the decrement of church numerals speeds up.

$$
\text{div}=\Theta(\lambda f.\lambda mn.(\text{lt }mn)0(\text{add }1(f(\text{sub }mn)n)))\\
\text{rem}=\Theta(\lambda f.\lambda mn.(\text{lt }mn)m(f(\text{sub }mn)n))\\
\text{log}=\Theta(\lambda f.\lambda mn.(\text{lt }mn)0(\text{add }1(f(\text{div }mn)n)))
$$


## Recursive Algorithms and Data Structures

Recursive algorithms work well with recursive data structures such as linked list. A typical reduction function could be defined as:

$$
\text{reduce}=\Theta(\lambda f.\lambda lr.(\text{is-nil }(\text{pop-front }l))(\text{get-front }l)(r(\text{get-front }l)(f(\text{pop-front }l)r)))
$$

With $l=(1,3,5)$, you could get:

$$
\text{reduce }l\text{add}=9\\
\text{reduce }l\text{mul}=15
$$

With the powerful weapon of recursion, now it is not difficult to implement arbitrary computational task via lambda calculus.